In this lecture, we'll do a walkthrough in the lab of our
summary routes and our default routes. We're using the same lab set up again with three PCs and five
routers.
They're all pre-configured with their IP addresses and routers R1 to R4 have connectivity to
each other along the top path with static routes. R5 does not have any routing configured yet. Let's
have a look at that.
So I'm here on PC1,
let's just move over to R1 and do a 'show ip route'. And
you can see I've got static routes for all of the individual 10.1.0.0/16
networks configured on R1. On R2, I've got routes configured there as well,
again all /24s.
The same on R3 and on R4, so
if I jump onto PC1 and then let's just have a look and see the IP address of PC3, okay so PC1
is 10.0.0.10,
PC3 is 10.1.2.10.
So from PC1, I ping 10.1.2.10, you can see that there's connectivity there and also
I'll do a traceroute as well so I'll trace 10.1.2.10 and you can see it's going
10.0.1.1, 10.0.0.2, 10.1.0.1, and 10.1.1.1.
We have to look back at the topology diagram, it's going R1 to R2 to R3 to R4.
Okay, so that is the current set up.
If we have a look back at R1 again, you'll see that it's got individual routes for each of the networks
going over to the left hand side.
So let's just remove these individual routes
so I'll go 'config t' and 'no ip route 10.1.0.0 255.255.255.0'.
I can see it's a /24 from the routing table and the next hop was 10.0.0.2. So that will
remove the first route
I'll use the up arrow to remove the second route which is 10.1.1.0 and also 10.1.2.0, and finally,
10.1.3.0.
Again, if I now do a 'do show ip route,'
I should see I've got no static routes left in a routing table and if I tried to ping PC3 from
PC1 now this is going to fail because R1 doesn't have routes.
Okay, so let's replace all of those individual /24 routes with a single summary route.
So before, if we just scroll up a little bit, I had four separate /24 routes for 10.1.0.0,
10.1.1.0, 10.1.2.0, 10.1.3.0. So I can replace that with a summary route,
I'll make that ip route 10.1.0.0 and a /16, so 255.255.0.0,
and this will cover everything that begins with 10.1 it doesn't matter what the last two octets
are, and the next hop address is 10.0.0.2. And if I now do a 'do show ip route.'
I've just got one static route in the routing table rather than four, and this should give me connectivity
from PC1 to PC3. Again,
let's just check that, so I'll do the ping and you see that hopefully in a second this will work,
there you go
so it took a couple of pings for ARP and stuff like that and the ping is now working.
So that's how you can configure a summary route.
It cuts down on your admin work because you don't need to configure so many routes,
it also takes up a little less memory in the routers as well.
Okay, so that was the first part of the lab that I wanted to show you. The next thing that I want to show
you is the effect of the Longest Prefix Match when we have overlapping routes.
So let's go back to the topology diagram again, and we've got connectivity between that routers R1
to R4 along the top path. R5 does not have any routes configured right now.
So, let's fixed that.
I'll configure a summary route on R5 pointing at the routes behind R1 which all start with
10.0. So back on the lab again, I'll go onto R5 and I'll configure 'ip route 10.0.0.0
255.255.0.0', I'll use a /16 again as a summary to cover all
the networks, and the next hop address on R1 was 10.0.3.1. Then, I want to check that
I can ping this from the far side of R5. So, I'll just have a quick look back the diagram again.
Now, obviously, R5 is able to ping 10.0.3.1 out the fasterEthernet3/0
interface. I'm going to ping a 10.0 network from the 10.1.3.2 interface that's
fastEthernet2/0 on R5, and I'm going to ping PC1. Now, the way that ping works by default by the way,
that any traffic originating from the router itself works is it uses the exit interface as the IP address.
So if I just do a standard ping from R5 going to 10.0.1.10 the source address will
be 10.0.3.2 because that would be the exit interface. That I can override this by doing
an extended ping I'm saying I want to use 10.1.3.2 as the source address. So the way
I do that is on R5, I'm just going to enter ping and then it's going to take me through the extended
commands.
Yes I do want to use IP, the target IP address is PC1 which is 10.0.1.10, repeat count is
5, that's fine,
same for the size and the timeout.
Yes, I do want to use extended commands because I'm going to set the source IP address to be
10.1.3.2. And then I can just take defaults for everything else and hit Enter to get those, and it's
doing the ping now. And again missed first couple for ARP and then the ping was a success.
So I do have connectivity between the far side interface on R5 and PC1.
Next, let's check and see what path it's actually taking.
So I'll do a traceroute as well I'll do an extended traceroute with the same settings again, so the
target IP addresses is 10.0.1.10.
The source address is going to be 10.1.3.2 again, and I can accept the defaults for
everything else, and I can see it went to 10.0.3.1 and then 10.0.1.10.
So we have a look at the topology diagram again, 10.0.3.1 is the fastEthernet3/0
interface on R1. So that traffic took the direct path. It went from R5 to R1 and
then to PC1. And let's review what's going to happen with the traffic coming back in the other direction
from PC1, so I'll jump back onto R1 again and I'll do a 'do show ip route' on here, and you see we've
got that summary route that we just configured. So traffic for all of the 10.1 networks which includes
the 10.1.3.2 interface on R5 is going to go via 10.0.0.2 which is on R2. Let's
just look at the topology diagram again, so 10.0.0.2 is the fastEthernet0/0
interface on R2. Okay, so the traffic going from R5 to R1 is taking the direct path between
them, but the return traffic from R1 to R5 is going to go R1 to R2 to R3 to R4 to R5
Let's just verify that that is what's actually happening, so I'm going to jump on PC1
and do a 'traceroute 10.1.3.2'. So here is PC1 and I'll trace to 10.1.3.2,
and you'll see it's going through all of those hops, so that was R1, R2, R3 and, R4.
So, we've got an asynchronous traffic flow here.
Traffic from R5 to PC1 is going directly via R1, traffic from PC1 going back to R5 is
going through R1, R2, R3, R4 before it then gets to R5.
So if you're routing, traffic in both directions is typically going to follow the same path but it doesn't
have to.
It's going to follow whichever path you tell your routers to take.
Alright, so let's fix this now,
let's set it up so that the traffic is going to go directly in both directions.
So to do that, I need to go back onto R1 and I'm going to configure ip route for 10.1.3.0
255.255.255.0,
with a next hop of R5, on the directly connected link which was 10.0.3.2.
And if I have a look at the routing table now, I'll do a 'show ip route'.
You'll see I've got a route here for 10.1.0.0/16,
and I've also got a route for 10.1.3.0/24.
So 10.1.3.0/24 is actually a subset of the 10.1.0.0. Both of these routes make
it into the routing table because they're not exactly the same.
And what's going to happen is whenever I send traffic to 10.1.3.x it will match both of
these routes.
But because the second route has got a longer prefix, it's a /24 compared to a /16, meaning it's
more specific, it's the bottom right
that will take effect and the traffic will go via 10.0.3.2. Traffic for any other network
that begins with 10.1 like 10.1.0 or 10.1.1, etc., will only match
the top route.
So it will go through the top route.
So let's just verify that this is what's going to actually happen.
So if I go back onto PC1 now, and 'trace 10.1.3.2' again, we should see this taking
the direct path now and we can see that's what happened.
Okay,
so that was our summary routes and the effects of the longest prefix match.